[NO QA] update PERFORMANCE.md (#67239)
Expensify/App: contributingGuides/PERFORMANCE.md

# React Performance Tips

### General Performance Considerations

When investigating performance issues, it's crucial to understand the underlying principles and common pitfalls.

#### Understanding Performance Issues

Performance issues often manifest as slow rendering or unresponsiveness. The goal of performance investigation is to identify the root cause of these regressions and measure their impact on the system. Key metrics to consider typically include:

*   **Resource Consumption:** CPU, RAM, network, storage, and battery usage.
*   **Responsiveness:** Frames per second (FPS) and Time to Interactive (TTI).
*   **Thread Usage:** JavaScript and native thread activity.

> *   **React Pipeline:** The number and volume of component renders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **React Pipeline:** Frequency and cost of component renders.
```

#### Establishing a Test Flow and Baseline

Before diving into detailed profiling, it's essential to establish a consistent "test flow" or reproduction steps for the performance issue. This ensures that measurements are consistent and comparable. Additionally, capturing "baseline measurements" is crucial. This involves noting key meta-information about the testing environment and application state, such as:

*   The specific user account and its state.
*   The exact commit SHA of the codebase being tested.
*   Network conditions (online/offline, throttling).
*   The platform(s) and device types used (simulator/emulator vs. physical device).
*   The type of build (development vs. optimized production build).

Maintaining a stable setup for these baseline measurements is critical for accurate comparisons and effective performance optimization.

> - Always test performance with the production build as development mode is not optimized.

Reviewer 2: Ideally yes, but I think is not always feasible testing production builds when you are proposing performance improvements and needs to do testing in the App. Could we loose this and explain that it can be done in development too?

- Use caution when adding subscriptions that might re-render very large trees of components e.g. subscribing to state that changes often (current report, current route, etc) in the app root.
- Avoid passing new functions as props to components on every render. This can be avoided by using `useCallback` or by defining the function outside of the component.

## Tools

### **Web**: Chrome Dev Tools > Performance

- Profiling in Chrome Dev Tools performance tab in the "Timing" section
- This will show various components and how long they took to render. It can be a little intense to dig through it all at first, but the more time you spend with it the easier it gets to separate the signal from noise.
- The timing information might be inaccurate in development mode since this slows things down a ton. However, it's still useful for seeing which things are re-rendering. You can also use the React DevTools Profiler to get more accurate timing information.

#### Steps to Profile:

1. **Open Chrome DevTools (`cmd+shift+j`)**
   
2. **Capture Performance Data**
   - Open "Performance" tab

>    - Press red dot in the top left corner to start profiling
>    - Perform the actions you want to profile
>    - Press the red dot again to stop profiling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Press red record button in the top-left corner to start profiling
   - Perform the actions you want to profile
   - Press the red record button again to stop profiling
```

  
3. **Analyze the profile:**
   - Download the trace
   - Open [SpeedScope](https://www.speedscope.app/) and upload the trace
   - Analyze the trace

**Suggested:** [React Performance Profiling](https://calibreapp.com/blog/react-performance-profiling-optimization)

### **iOS & Android:** React Native DevTools

React Native uses the [Hermes](https://reactnative.dev/docs/hermes) JavaScript engine on both Android and iOS.

#### Steps to Profile with Hermes:

1. **Enable profiling:**
   - In the Metro bundler terminal, press `j` to open React Native DevTools
   - Select the instance of the app you want to connect to
   - Open "Settings"
   - Go to "Experiments" tab
   - Enable "[React Native] Enable Performance panel"
  
  Once it's done, you should have the "Performance" tab available in the React Native DevTools

2. **Capture Performance Data:**
   - Open "Performance" tab

>    - Press red dot in the top left corner to start profiling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Press the red record button in the top-left corner to start profiling
```

   - Perform the actions you want to profile

>    - Press the red dot again to stop profiling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Press the red record button again to stop profiling
```

3. **Analyze the profile:**
   - Download the trace
   - Open [SpeedScope](https://www.speedscope.app/) and upload the trace
   - Analyze the trace

#### Important Notes:
- For more accurate performance data, prefer release builds when possible

> - The generated traces require symbolication to show meaningful function names in release builds

Reviewer 2: I think we need to add `symbolication` to `cspell.json`

> - The generated traces require symbolication to show meaningful function names in release builds

Reviewer: You need to add 'symbolication' to our dictionary `cspell.json` 😄

> ### React Native Release Profiler

Reviewer 2: Does these steps work for development builds?

Author: they are a bit different, but since the readme provides the information on how to record profiles in development builds, I think we can focus just on release builds in this case?

Author: yeah they only mention production here. What I mean is we already provide instruction how to profile JS thread in the Performance tab in development mode, so I think we don't have to provide instructions on using release profiler in this mode, wdyt?

#### Steps to Profile:

1. **Start Profiling:**
   - Open the debugging console (four-finger tap)
   - Press "Record Troubleshoot Data"
   - Perform the actions you want to profile
   - Press "Record Troubleshoot Data" again

2. **Retrieve Profile:**
   - The profile is saved to the device's Documents folder

3. **Symbolicate Profile:**
   - Download source maps from the GitHub release. Each release contains source maps for Android, iOS and Web.
   - Copy the recorded profile to the root folder of the E/App repository
   - Copy the source maps to the specific paths:
     - **Android:** `android/app/build/generated/sourcemaps/react/productionRelease/` and rename file to `index.android.bundle.map`
     - **iOS:** root folder and rename file to `main.jsbundle.map`
     - **Web:** `dist` and run `npm run combine-web-sourcemaps` to generate merged sourcemaps
   - Run the appropriate symbolication command:
     ```bash
     # iOS
     npm run symbolicate-release:ios
     # Android
     npm run symbolicate-release:android
     # Web
     npm run symbolicate-release:web
     ```
   - This converts the raw profile into a format with readable function names

4. **Analyze:**

>    - Upload the symbolicated profile to [Speedscope](https://www.speedscope.app/)

Reviewer 2: `Speedscope` and `symbolicated` too.

>    - Upload the symbolicated profile to [Speedscope](https://www.speedscope.app/)

Reviewer: Same here, `speedscope` has to be added to dictionary

   - Or use Chrome DevTools Performance tab

### Flashlight

[Flashlight](https://github.com/bamlab/flashlight) is a tool for measuring React Native app performance with quantifiable metrics. It provides automated performance testing and can generate consistent baseline measurements.

#### Installation:
```bash
curl https://get.flashlight.dev | bash
```

#### Prerequisites:

> - Android device

Reviewer: I think it is worth mentioning you need to build the app as well (it's better to build production build if I remember?)

Author: Yeah it's going to work with development build as well, but the results might differ a lot. Added a backlink to "How to create a release build on Android" section

- USB debugging enabled on the Android device
  - Go to Settings > Developer options > Enable USB debugging
  - If Developer options is not visible, go to Settings > About phone and tap "Build number" 7 times

#### Setup and Usage:

1. **Start the Flashlight measurement server:**
   ```bash
   flashlight measure
   ```

2. **Open your app and detect bundle ID:**

>    - Open your React Native app on the connected Android device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Open the app on the connected Android device
```

   - Press "Auto Detect" in the opened window

3. **Perform your test actions:**
   - Press "Start measuring"
   - Interact with your app: Navigate, scroll, or perform the actions you want to measure
   - Flashlight will collect performance metrics in real-time

4. **Stop measurement and view results:**
   - Press "Stop measuring"

> You can run the same flow multiple times and record a measurements for each one of them. Once you download the report, you can later see an average results for all the runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run the same flow multiple times and record a measurements for each run. Once you download the report, you can later see an average results for all the runs.
```

4. **Generate comparison report:**
   ```bash
   flashlight report baseline.json improvements.json
   ```
5. **Analyze deltas** - Flashlight shows performance differences between runs

**Best Practices:**
- Use consistent test flows across measurements
- Run multiple iterations for statistical accuracy
- Test on the same device and build configuration
- Document what changes were made between measurements

### React DevTools Profiler

The React DevTools Profiler provides React-specific performance insights and is more streamlined than general JavaScript profilers. It focuses specifically on component rendering performance and can help identify unnecessary re-renders.

#### Setup:
- **Web:** Built into React DevTools browser extension
- **Mobile:** Built-in - press `j` in Metro terminal to open React DevTools

#### Steps to Profile:

1. **Configure Settings:**
   - Open React DevTools and go to the Profiler tab
   - Click the settings icon
   - Enable "Record why each component rendered while profiling" for detailed insights
   - Optionally set "Hide commits below X ms" to focus on slow renders

2. **Capture React Performance:**

>    - Click the record button (circle icon) to start profiling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Click the red record button to start profiling
```

**Suggested:** [Deep Dive with the React DevTools creator](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nySib7ipZdk)

### Tracking Re-renders

Understanding when and why components re-render is crucial for identifying performance bottlenecks. Several tools can help visualize and track component re-renders in real-time.

#### React DevTools Highlight Updates

React DevTools includes a built-in feature to visually highlight components when they re-render:

- Open React DevTools
- Go to "Settings" (gear icon)
- Under "General" tab, enable "Highlight updates when components render"
- Components will be highlighted with colored borders when they update

#### React Scan

[React Scan](https://github.com/aidenybai/react-scan) automatically detects and highlights performance issues in React applications without requiring installation:

**Usage:**
```bash
npx react-scan https://localhost:8082
```

You need to have the web server running. The app will open in a separate browser window.

#### Why Did You Render?

Why Did You Render (WDYR) sends console notifications about potentially avoidable component re-renders:

- To enable it, set `USE_WDYR=true` in your `.env` file

> - You can add or exclude tracked components by their `displayName` in `wdyr.js`

Reviewer: Does this work for you?

Author: Haven't used it in a while, but it worked for me some time ago (at least on web)

Reviewer 3: Can you please confirm this before we add it to the instructions 😄

- You can test performance in development mode, but keep in mind it’s not optimized — things like loggers, debug tools, and extra checks can slow things down or cause jank that won’t happen in production. This can skew results, meaning you might misinterpret what’s slow in your app. For accurate metrics, always verify with a production build.
- Use [`React.memo`](https://react.dev/reference/react/memo), [`useMemo`](https://react.dev/reference/react/useMemo), and [`useCallback`](https://react.dev/reference/react/useCallback) to prevent expensive re-renders.
- Using a combination of [React DevTools Profiler](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/react-developer-tools/fmkadmapgofadopljbjfkapdkoienihi?hl=en) and [Chrome Dev Tools Performance Timing](https://calibreapp.com/blog/react-performance-profiling-optimization) can help identify unnecessary re-renders. Both tools can be used to time an interaction like the app starting up or navigating to a new screen.
- Watch out for [very large lists](https://reactnative.dev/docs/optimizing-flatlist-configuration) and things like `Image` components re-fetching images on render when a remote uri did not change.

> - Avoid the temptation to over-optimize. There is added cost in both code complexity and performance when using memoization hooks like `useMemo` and `useCallback`. Be selective about when you use them and make sure there is a measurable difference before proposing the change. As a very general rule, it should be measurably faster to run the memoized logic than it would be to let React re-render the component without any extra intervention from us.

Reviewer 3: Tough one, but could we give a clearer guideline for deciding whether to use a memo, making it more black and white for contributors?

- Use caution when adding subscriptions that might re-render very large trees of components e.g. subscribing to state that changes often (current report, current route, etc) in the app root.
- Avoid passing new functions as props to components on every render. This can be avoided by using `useCallback` or by defining the function outside of the component.

## Tools

### **Web**: Chrome Dev Tools > Performance

- Profiling in Chrome Dev Tools performance tab in the "Timing" section
- This will show various components and how long they took to render. It can be a little intense to dig through it all at first, but the more time you spend with it the easier it gets to separate the signal from noise.
- The timing information might be inaccurate in development mode since this slows things down a ton. However, it's still useful for seeing which things are re-rendering. You can also use the React DevTools Profiler to get more accurate timing information.

#### Steps to Profile:

> 1. **Open Chrome DevTools (`cmd+shift+j`)**

Reviewer 3: I think its option on Max
```suggestion
1. **Open Chrome DevTools (`cmd+option+j`)**
```

Author: you're right, thanks for spotting this 🥇

   
2. **Capture Performance Data**
   - Open "Performance" tab
   - Press red record button in the top-left corner to start profiling
   - Perform the actions you want to profile
   - Press the red record button again to stop profiling
  
3. **Analyze the profile:**
   - Download the trace
   - Open [SpeedScope](https://www.speedscope.app/) and upload the trace
   - Analyze the trace

> **Suggested:** [React Performance Profiling](https://calibreapp.com/blog/react-performance-profiling-optimization)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Suggested reading:** [React Performance Profiling](https://calibreapp.com/blog/react-performance-profiling-optimization)
```

## Reconciliation

React is pretty smart and in many cases is able to tell if something needs to update. The process by which React goes about updating the UI is called reconciliation. If React thinks something needs to update, it will render it again. React also assumes that if a parent component rendered, then its child should also re-render.

Re-rendering can be expensive at times and when dealing with nested props or state React may render when it doesn't need to which can be wasteful. A good example of this is a component that is being passed an object as a prop. Let's say the component only requires one or two properties from that object in order to build its view, but doesn't care about some others. React will still re-render that component even if nothing it cares about has changed. Most of the time this is fine since reconciliation is pretty fast. But we might run into performance issues when re-rendering massive lists.

In this example, the most preferable solution would be to **only pass the properties that the object needs to know about** to the component in the first place.

> Another option would be to use `React.memo()` to add more specific rules comparing `props` to **explicitly  tell React not to perform a re-render**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another option is to use `React.memo()` with a custom comparison function to prevent unnecessary re-renders.
```

React might still take some time to re-render a component when its parent component renders. If it takes a long time to re-render the child even though we have no props changing, then we can use `React.memo()` which will "shallow compare" the `props` to see if a component should re-render.

If you aren't sure what exactly is changing about some deeply nested object prop, you can use `Performance.diffObject()` in `React.memo()` method which should show you exactly what is changing from one update to the next.

> **Suggested:** [React Docs - Preserving and Resetting state](https://react.dev/learn/preserving-and-resetting-state)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Suggested resource:** [React Docs - Preserving and Resetting state](https://react.dev/learn/preserving-and-resetting-state)
```
